# formbloom_conestogo-2017HAB

## Abstract

The prevalence and increasing global distribution of cyanobacteria-dominated harmful algal blooms is strongly associated with changing climatic patterns and local biogeochemical and hydrological processes. Changes to precipitation frequency and intensity, as predicted by current climate models, are likely to alter bloom development and composition due to nutrient fluxes and water column mixing. However, few studies have directly documented the effects of precipitation events on cyanobacterial composition, biomass, and toxin production. In this study, we describe an early-initiated cyanobacterial bloom in Conestogo Lake, a eutrophic flood control reservoir located in southwestern Ontario, following heavy rainfall and subsequent flooding within the catchment. A surge in bioavailable phosphorus resulted in biomass increases of Aphanizomenon flos-aquae throughout the reservoir approximately 2 weeks post-flooding. Anabaenopeptin-A and three microcystin congeners (microcystin-LR, -YR, and -RR) were detected at varying levels across sites during the bloom period, which lasted between 3 - 5 weeks. In addition, each of the three sampled sites varied in physical and chemical properties throughout the sampling campaign suggesting different eco-zones within the reservoir that may be influenced by flow. Together, these findings indicate that water column mixing and phosphorus concentrations were the key drivers for the early cyanobacterial bloom in Conestogo Lake and further highlight the complex relationship and variability within reservoir systems. Therefore, effective management goals and mitigation strategies for bloom-related water quality impairment must be both responsive and adaptive to the complexity of drivers affecting blooms.



**citation**: 



## Co-authors

Megan L. Larsen, *Wilfrid Laurier University*, mlarsen@wlu.ca, ORCID 0000-0002-4155-1293

Helen M. Baulch, *University of Saskatchenwan*, hbaulch@usask.ca, ORCID 0000-0001-9018-4998

Sherry L. Schiff, *University of Waterloo*, ORCID 0000-0002-7704-7304

Dana Simon, *Université de Montréal*

Sebastien Sauve, *Université de Montréal*

Jason Venkiteswaran, *Wilfrid Laurier University*, jvenkiteswaran@wlu.ca, ORCID 0000-0002-6574-7071



## Data sources

Figshare Project DOI: 

Grand River Conservation Authority (GRCA): https://waterdata.grca.ca



## Funding sources

* Global Water Futures: FORecasting tools and Mitigation options for diverse BLOOM-affected lakes (FORMBLOOM)
* Genome Canada and Genome Quebec: Algal Blooms, Treatment, Risk Assessment,
  Prediction and Prevention through Genomics (ATRAPP)



## Keywords

cyanobacterial bloom, harmful algal bloom, Ontario, reservoir, extreme rainfall



## Geographic Coverage

- Geo Bounding Box (west): -80.804541
- Geo Bounding Box (east): -80.680523
- Geo Bounding Box (north): 43.741943
- Geo Bounding Box (south): 43.665381



## Additional information and support

- Sensitive Data Flag - Human Participants: NO
- Sensitive Data Flag - Indigenous Partnerships: YES 
- Sensitive Data Flag - Government Partnerships: NO 
- Sensitive Data Flag - Industry Partnerships: YES
- Access Restrictions



## Repo content information

### data/raw_data

Raw data files in various formats. Original files generated by analytical equipment, received from a data provider or outside contractor, etc.

### data/clean_data

Clean data in formats for long-term storage. Modified data with the appropriate column/row headers and data structure.

### code

Scripts for processing raw data into cleaned data, outside derived code, and user derived code.

### docs

Project notes, other documentation, etc.

### output

Figures and tables produced from analysis.